% UFTRACE-LIVE(1) Uftrace User Manuals
% Namhyung Kim <namhyung@gmail.com>
% May, 2016

NAME
====
uftrace-live - Trace functions in a command during live execution


SYNOPSIS
========
uftrace [live] [*options*] COMMAND [*command-options*]


DESCRIPTION
===========
This command runs COMMAND and prints its functions with time and thread info.  This is basically the same as running the `uftrace record` and `uftrace replay` commands in turn, but it does not save a data file.  This command accepts most options that are accepted by the record or replay commands.


OPTIONS
=======
-b *SIZE*, \--buffer=*SIZE*
:   Size of internal buffer in which trace data will be saved.  Default size is 128k.

-F *FUNC*, \--filter=*FUNC*
:   Set filter to trace selected functions only.  This option can be used more than once.  See *FILTERS*.

-N *FUNC*, \--notrace=*FUNC*
:   Set filter not to trace selected functions (or the functions called underneath them).  This option can be used more than once.  See *FILTERS*.

-T *TRG*, \--trigger=*TRG*
:   Set trigger on selected functions.  This option can be used more than once.  See *TRIGGERS*.

-D *DEPTH*, \--depth=*DEPTH*
:   Set global trace limit in nesting level.

-t *TIME*, \--time-filter=*TIME*
:   Do not show small functions under the time threshold.  If some functions explicitly have 'trace' trigger, those are always traced regardless of execution time.

-A *SPEC*, \--argument=*SPEC*
:   Record function arguments.  This option can be used more than once.  See *ARGUMENTS*.

-R *SPEC*, \--retval=*SPEC*
:   Record function return value.  This option can be used more than once.  See *ARGUMENTS*.

\--auto-args
:   Automatically record arguments and return values of well-known library functions.  Recommend to use it with `--nest-libcall`.

-f *FIELD*, \--output-fields=*FIELD*
:   Customize field in the output.  Possible values are: duration, tid, time, delta, elapsed and addr.  Multiple fields can be set by using comma.  Special field of 'none' can be used (solely) to hide all fields.  Default is 'duration,tid'.  See *FIELDS*.

-r *RANGE*, \--time-range=*RANGE*
:   Only show functions executed within the time RANGE.  The RANGE can be \<start\>~\<stop\> (separated by "~") and one of \<start\> and \<stop\> can be omitted.  The \<start\> and \<stop\> are timestamp or elapsed time if they have \<time_unit\> postfix, for example '100us'.  However, it is highly recommended to use only elapsed time because there is no way to know the timestamp before actually running the program.  The timestamp or elapsed time can be shown with `-f time` or `-f elapsed` option respectively.

\--force
:   Allow running uftrace even if some problems occur.  When `uftrace record` finds no mcount symbol (which is generated by compiler) in the executable, it quits with an error message since uftrace can not trace the executable.  However, it is possible that the user is only interested in functions within a dynamically-linked library, in which case this option can be used to cause uftrace to run the program regardless.  Also, the `-A`/`--argument` and `-R`/`--retval` options work only for binaries built with `-pg`, so uftrace will normally exit when it tries to run binaries built without that option.  This option ignores the warning and goes on tracing without the argument and/or return value.

\--flat
:   Print flat format rather than C-like format.  This is usually for debugging and testing purpose.

-L *PATH*, \--library-path=*PATH*
:   Load necessary internal libraries from this path.  This is for testing.

-k, \--kernel
:   Trace kernel functions as well as user functions.  This is simply a shortcut to `--kernel-depth=1`.

\--no-libcall
:   Do not record library function invocations.  Library calls are normally traced by hooking the dynamic linker's resolve function in the PLT.  One can disable it with this option.

\--no-pltbind
:   Do not bind dynamic symbol address.  This option uses the `LD_BIND_NOT` environment variable to trace library function calls which might be missing due to concurrent (first) accesses.  It is not meaningful to use this option with the `--no-libcall` option.

\--nest-libcall
:   Trace function calls between libraries.  By default, uftrace only record library call from the main executable.  Implies `--force`.

\--disable
:   Start uftrace with tracing disabled.  This is only meaningful when used with a `trace_on` trigger.

\--demangle=*TYPE*
:   Demangle C++ symbol names.  Possible values are "full", "simple" and "no".  Default is "simple" which ignores function arguments and template parameters.

\--report
:   Show live-report before replay.

--column-view
:   Show each task in separate column.  This makes easy to distinguish functions in different tasks.

--column-offset=*DEPTH*
:   When `--column-view` option is used, this option specifies the amount of offset between each task.  Default is 8.

--task-newline
:   Interleave a new line when task is changed.  This makes easy to distinguish functions in different tasks.

\--num-thread=*NUM*
:   Use NUM threads to record trace data.  Default is 1/4 of online CPUs (but when full kernel tracing is enabled, it will use the full number of CPUs).

--no-comment
:   Do not show comments of returned functions.

\--libmcount-single
:   Use single thread version of libmcount for faster recording.  This is ignored if the target program calls `pthread_create()`.

\--rt-prio=*PRIO*
:   Boost priority of recording threads to real-time (FIFO) with priority of *PRIO*.  This is particularly useful for high-volume data such as full kernel tracing.

-K *DEPTH*, \--kernel-depth=*DEPTH*
:   Set kernel max function depth separately.  Implies `--kernel`.

\--kernel-buffer=*SIZE*
:   Set kernel tracing buffer size.  The default value (in the kernel) is 1408k.

\--kernel-skip-out
:   Do not show kernel functions called outside of user functions.  This option is deprecated and set to true by default.

\--kernel-full
:   Show all kernel functions called outside of user functions.  This option is the inverse of `--kernel-skip-out`.

\--kernel-only
:   Show kernel functions only without user functions.

-P *FUNC*, \--patch=*FUNC*
:   Patch FUNC dynamically.  This is only applicable binaries built with `-pg -mfentry -mnop-mcount` on x86_64.  This option can be used more than once.  See *DYNAMIC TRACING*.

-E *EVENT*, \--event=*EVENT*
:   Enable event tracing.  The event should be available on the system.

\--list-event
:   Show available events in the process.

\--keep-pid
:   Retain same pid for traced program.  For some daemon processes, it is important to have same pid when forked.  Running under uftrace normally changes pid as it calls fork() again internally.  Note that it might corrupt terminal setting so it'd be better using it with `--no-pager` option.

-S *SCRIPT_PATH*, \--script=*SCRIPT_PATH*
:   Add a script to do addtional work at the entry and exit of function.  The type of script is detected by the postfix such as '.py' for python.

\--event-full
:   Show all (user) events outside of user functions.

\--libname
:   Show library name along with function name.

--match=*TYPE*
:   Use pattern match using TYPE.  Possible types are `regex` and `glob`.  Default is `regex`.


FILTERS
=======
The uftrace tool supports filtering out uninteresting functions.  When uftrace is called it receives two types of function filter; an opt-in filter with `-F`/`--filter` and an opt-out filter with `-N`/`--notrace`.  These filters can be applied either at record time or replay time.

The first one is an opt-in filter. By default, it doesn't trace anything. But when one of the specified functions is executed, tracing is started.  When the function returns, tracing is stopped again.

For example, consider a simple program which calls `a()`, `b()` and `c()` in turn.

    $ cat abc.c
    void c(void) {
        /* do nothing */
    }

    void b(void) {
        c();
    }

    void a(void) {
        b();
    }

    int main(void) {
        a();
        return 0;
    }

    $ gcc -pg -o abc abc.c

Normally uftrace will trace all the functions from `main()` to `c()`.

    $ uftrace ./abc
    # DURATION    TID     FUNCTION
     138.494 us [ 1234] | __cxa_atexit();
                [ 1234] | main() {
                [ 1234] |   a() {
                [ 1234] |     b() {
       3.880 us [ 1234] |       c();
       5.475 us [ 1234] |     } /* b */
       6.448 us [ 1234] |   } /* a */
       8.631 us [ 1234] | } /* main */

But when the `-F b` filter option is used, it will not trace `main()` or `a()` but only `b()` and `c()`.

    $ uftrace -F b ./abc
    # DURATION    TID     FUNCTION
                [ 1234] | b() {
       3.880 us [ 1234] |   c();
       5.475 us [ 1234] | } /* b */

The second type of filter is opt-out. By default, everything is traced, but when one of the specified functions is executed, tracing stops. When the excluded function returns, tracing is started again.

In the above example, you can omit the function `b()` and all calls it makes with the `-N` option.

    $ uftrace live -N b ./abc
    # DURATION    TID     FUNCTION
     138.494 us [ 1234] | __cxa_atexit();
                [ 1234] | main() {
       6.448 us [ 1234] |   a();
       8.631 us [ 1234] | } /* main */

In addition, you can limit the print nesting level with the `-D` option.

    $ uftrace -D 3 ./abc
    # DURATION    TID     FUNCTION
     138.494 us [ 1234] | __cxa_atexit();
                [ 1234] | main() {
                [ 1234] |   a() {
       5.475 us [ 1234] |     b();
       6.448 us [ 1234] |   } /* a */
       8.631 us [ 1234] | } /* main */

In the above example, uftrace only prints functions up to a depth of 3, so leaf function `c()` was omitted.  Note that the `-D` option works with `-F`.

Sometimes it's useful to see long-running functions only.  This is good because there are usually many tiny functions that are not interesting.  The `-t`/`--time-filter` option implements the time-based filter that only records functions which run longer than the given threshold.  In the above example, the user might want to see functions running more than 5 microseconds like below:

    $ uftrace live -t 5us ./abc
    # DURATION    TID     FUNCTION
     138.494 us [ 1234] | __cxa_atexit();
                [ 1234] | main() {
                [ 1234] |   a() {
       5.475 us [ 1234] |     b();
       6.448 us [ 1234] |   } /* a */
       8.631 us [ 1234] | } /* main */

You can also set triggers on filtered functions.  See *TRIGGERS* section below for details.


TRIGGERS
========
The uftrace tool supports triggering actions on selected function calls with or without filters.  Currently supported triggers are `depth` (for record and replay) and `backtrace` (for replay only).  The BNF for trigger specifications is like below:

    <trigger>    :=  <symbol> "@" <actions>
    <actions>    :=  <action>  | <action> "," <actions>
    <action>     :=  "depth="<num> | "backtrace" | "trace" | "trace_on" | "trace_off" |
                     "recover" | "color="<color> | "time="<time_spec> | "read="<read_spec> |
                     "finish" | "filter" | "notrace"
    <time_spec>  :=  <num> [ <time_unit> ]
    <time_unit>  :=  "ns" | "nsec" | "us" | "usec" | "ms" | "msec" | "s" | "sec" | "m" | "min"
    <read_spec>  :=  "proc/statm" | "page-fault" | "pmu-cycle" | "pmu-cache" | "pmu-branch"

The `depth` trigger is to change filter depth during execution of the function.  It can be used to apply different filter depths for different functions.  And the `backtrace` trigger is used to print a stack backtrace at replay time.

The color trigger is to change the color of the function in replay output.  The supported colors are `red`, `green`, `blue`, `yellow`, `magenta`, `cyan`, `bold`, and `gray`.

The following example shows how triggers work.  The global filter maximum depth is 5, but when function `b()` is called, it is changed to 1, so functions below `b()` will not shown.

    $ uftrace live -D 5 -T 'b@depth=1' ./abc
    # DURATION    TID     FUNCTION
     138.494 us [ 1234] | __cxa_atexit();
                [ 1234] | main() {
                [ 1234] |   a() {
       5.475 us [ 1234] |     b();
       6.448 us [ 1234] |   } /* a */
       8.631 us [ 1234] | } /* main */

The `backtrace` trigger is only meaningful in the replay command.

The `traceon` and `traceoff` actions (the `_` can be omitted from `trace_on` and `trace_off`) control whether uftrace records the specified functions or not.

The 'recover' trigger is for some corner cases in which the process accesses the callstack directly.  During tracing of the v8 javascript engine, for example, it kept getting segfaults in the garbage collection stage.  It was because v8 incorporates the return address into compiled code objects(?).  The `recover` trigger restores the original return address at the function entry point and resets to the uftrace return hook address again at function exit.  I was managed to work around the segfault by setting the `recover` trigger on the related function (specifically `ExitFrame::Iterate`).

The 'time' trigger is to change time filter setting during execution of the function.  It can be used to apply different time filter for different functions.

The `read` trigger is to read some information at runtime.  The result will be
recorded as (builtin) events at the beginning and the end of a given function.
As of now, following events are supported:

 * "proc/statm": process memory stat from /proc filesystem
 * "page-fault": number of page faults using getrusage(2)
 * "pmu-cycle":  cpu cycles and instructions using Linux perf-event syscall
 * "pmu-cache":  (cpu) cache-references and misses using Linux perf-event syscall
 * "pmu-branch": branch instructions and misses using Linux perf-event syscall

The results are printed in comments like below.

    $ uftrace -T a@read=proc/statm ./abc
    # DURATION    TID     FUNCTION
                [ 1234] | main() {
                [ 1234] |   a() {
                [ 1234] |     /* read:proc/statm (size=6808KB, rss=776KB, shared=712KB) */
                [ 1234] |     b() {
                [ 1234] |       c() {
       1.448 us [ 1234] |         getpid();
      10.270 us [ 1234] |       } /* c */
      11.250 us [ 1234] |     } /* b */
                [ 1234] |     /* diff:proc/statm (size=+4KB, rss=+0KB, shared=+0KB) */
      18.380 us [ 1234] |   } /* a */
      19.537 us [ 1234] | } /* main */

The 'finish' trigger is to end recording.  The process still can run and this can be useful to trace unterminated processes like daemon.

The 'filter' and 'notrace' triggers have same effect as -F/--filter and -N/--notrace options respectively.

Triggers only work for user-level functions for now.


ARGUMENTS
=========
The uftrace tool supports recording function arguments and/or return values using the `-A`/`--argument` and `-R`/`--retval` options respectively.  The syntax is very similar to that of triggers:

    <argument>    :=  <symbol> "@" <specs>
    <specs>       :=  <spec> | <spec> "," <spec>
    <spec>        :=  ( <int_spec> | <float_spec> | <ret_spec> )
    <int_spec>    :=  "arg" N [ "/" <format> [ <size> ] ] [ "%" ( <reg> | <stack> ) ]
    <float_spec>  :=  "fparg" N [ "/" ( <size> | "80" ) ] [ "%" ( <reg> | <stack> ) ]
    <ret_spec>    :=  "retval" [ "/" <format> [ <size> ] ]
    <format>      :=  "d" | "i" | "u" | "x" | "s" | "c" | "f" | "S" | "p"
    <size>        :=  "8" | "16" | "32" | "64"
    <reg>         :=  <arch-specific register name>  # "rdi", "xmm0", "r0", ...
    <stack>       :=  "stack" [ "+" ] <offset>

The `-A`/`--argument` option takes argN where N is an index of the arguments.  The index starts from 1 and corresponds to the argument passing order of the calling convention on the system.  Note that the indexes of arguments are separately counted for integer (or pointer) and floating-point type, and they can interfere depending on the calling convention.  The argN is for integer arguments and fpargN is for floating-point arguments.

Users can optionally specify a format and size for the arguments and/or return values.  The "d" format or without format field, uftrace treats them as 'long int' type for integers and 'double' for floating-point numbers.  The "i" format makes it signed integer type and "u" format is for unsigned type.  Both are printed as decimal while "x" format makes it printed as hexadecimal.  The "s" format is for null-terminated string type and "c" format is for character type.  The "f" format is for floating-point type and is meaningful only for return value (generally).  Note that fpargN doesn't take the format field since it's always floating-point.  The "S" format is for std::string, but it only supports libstdc++ library as of yet.  Finally, the "p" format is for function pointer. Once the target address is recorded, it will be displayed as function name.

Please beware when using string type arguments since it can crash the program if the (pointer) value is invalid.

It is also possible to specify a certain register name or stack offset for arguments (but not for return value).  The following register names can be used for argument:

 * x86: rdi, rsi, rdx, rcx, r8, r9 (for integer), xmm[0-7] (for floating-point)
 * arm: r[0-3] (for integer), s[0-15] or d[0-7] (for floating-point)

Examples are below:

    $ uftrace -A main@arg1/x -R main@retval/i32 ./abc
    # DURATION    TID     FUNCTION
     138.494 us [ 1234] | __cxa_atexit();
                [ 1234] | main(0x1) {
                [ 1234] |   a() {
                [ 1234] |     b() {
       3.880 us [ 1234] |       c();
       5.475 us [ 1234] |     } /* b */
       6.448 us [ 1234] |   } /* a */
       8.631 us [ 1234] | } = 0; /* main */

    $ uftrace -A puts@arg1/s -R puts@retval ./hello
    Hello world
    # DURATION    TID     FUNCTION
       1.457 us [21534] | __monstartup();
       0.997 us [21534] | __cxa_atexit();
                [21534] | main() {
       7.226 us [21534] |   puts("Hello world") = 12;
       8.708 us [21534] | } /* main */

Note that these arguments and return value are recorded only if the executable was built with the `-pg` option.  Executables built with `-finstrument-functions` will cause uftrace to exit with an error message.  Recording of arguments and return values only works with user-level functions for now.


FIELDS
======
The uftrace allows for user to customize the replay output with a couple of fields.  Here the field means info on the left side of the pipe (|) character.  By default it uses duration and tid fields, but you can use other fields in any order like:

    $ uftrace -f time,delta,duration,tid,addr ./abc
    #     TIMESTAMP      TIMEDELTA  DURATION    TID      ADDRESS     FUNCTION
        75059.205379813              1.374 us [27804]       4004d0 | __monstartup();
        75059.205384184   4.371 us   0.737 us [27804]       4004f0 | __cxa_atexit();
        75059.205386655   2.471 us            [27804]       4006b1 | main() {
        75059.205386838   0.183 us            [27804]       400656 |   a() {
        75059.205386961   0.123 us            [27804]       400669 |     b() {
        75059.205387078   0.117 us            [27804]       40067c |       c() {
        75059.205387264   0.186 us   0.643 us [27804]       4004b0 |         getpid();
        75059.205388501   1.237 us   1.423 us [27804]       40067c |       } /* c */
        75059.205388724   0.223 us   1.763 us [27804]       400669 |     } /* b */
        75059.205388878   0.154 us   2.040 us [27804]       400656 |   } /* a */
        75059.205389030   0.152 us   2.375 us [27804]       4006b1 | } /* main */

Each field has following meaning:

 * tid: task id (obtained by gettid(2))
 * duration: function execution time
 * time: timestamp at the execution
 * delta: difference between two timestamp in a task
 * elapsed: elapsed time from the first timestamp
 * addr: address of the function
 * task: task name (comm)
 * module: library or executable name of the function

The default value is 'duration,tid'.  If given field name starts with "+", then it'll be appended to the default fields.  So "-f +time" is as same as "-f duration,tid,time".  And it also accepts a special field name of 'none' which disables the field display and shows function output only.


DYNAMIC TRACING
===============
The uftrace tool supports dynamic function tracing which can be enabled at runtime (load-time, to be precise) on x86_64.  Before recording functions, normally you need to build the target program with `-pg` (or `-finstrument-functions`), then it has some performance impact because all funtions call `mcount()`.

With dynamic tracing, you can trace specific functions only given by the `-P`/`--patch` option.  However you need to add some more compiler (gcc) options when building the target program.  The gcc 5.1 or more recent versions provide `-mfentry` and `-mnop-mcount` options which add instrumentation code (i.e. calling `mcount()` function) at the very beginning of a function and convert the instruction to a NOP.  Then it has almost zero performance overhead when running in a normal condition.  The uftrace can convert it back to call `mcount()` if users want to (using `-P` option).

The following example shows a error message when normally running uftrace with the excutable built with `-pg -mfentry -mnop-mcount`. Because the binary doesn't call any instrumentation code (i.e. 'mcount').

    $ gcc -o abc -pg -mfentry -mnop-mcount tests/s-abc.c
    $ uftrace abc
    uftrace: /home/namhyung/project/uftrace/cmd-record.c:1305:check_binary
      ERROR: Can't find 'mcount' symbol in the 'abc'.
             It seems not to be compiled with -pg or -finstrument-functions flag
             which generates traceable code.  Please check your binary file.

But when the `-P a` patch option is used, and then only it can dynamically trace `a()`.

    $ uftrace --no-libcall -P a abc
    # DURATION    TID     FUNCTION
       0.923 us [19379] | a();

In addition, you can enable all functions at load time using '.' that matches to any character in a regex pattern with `P` option.

    $ uftrace --no-libcall -P . abc
    # DURATION    TID     FUNCTION
                [19387] | main() {
                [19387] |   a() {
                [19387] |     b() {
       0.940 us [19387] |       c();
       2.030 us [19387] |     } /* b */
       2.451 us [19387] |   } /* a */
       3.289 us [19387] | } /* main */

Clang/LLVM 4.0 provides a dynamic instrumentation technique called [X-ray](http://llvm.org/docs/XRay.html).  It's similar to a combination of `gcc -mfentry -mnop-mcount` and `-finstrument-functions`.  The uftrace also supports dynamic tracing on the excutables built with the `X-ray`.

For example, you can build the target program by clang with the below option and equally use `-P` option for dynamic tracing like below:

    $ clang -fxray-instrument -fxray-instruction-threshold=1 -o abc-xray  tests/s-abc.c
    $ uftrace -P main abc-xray
    # DURATION    TID     FUNCTION
                [11093] | main() {
       1.659 us [11093] |   getpid();
       5.963 us [11093] | } /* main */

    $ uftrace -P . abc-xray
    # DURATION    TID     FUNCTION
                [11098] | main() {
                [11098] |   a() {
                [11098] |     b() {
                [11098] |       c() {
       0.753 us [11098] |         getpid();
       1.430 us [11098] |       } /* c */
       1.915 us [11098] |     } /* b */
       2.405 us [11098] |   } /* a */
       3.005 us [11098] | } /* main */


SCRIPT EXECUTION
================
The uftrace tool supports script execution for each function entry and exit.  The supported script is only Python 2.7 as of now.

The user can write four functions. 'uftrace_entry' and 'uftrace_exit' are executed whenever each function is executed at the entry and exit.  However 'uftrace_begin' and 'uftrace_end' are only executed once when the target program begins and ends.

    $ cat scripts/simple.py
    def uftrace_begin():
        print("program begins...")

    def uftrace_entry(ctx):
        func = ctx["name"]
        print("entry : " + func + "()")

    def uftrace_exit(ctx):
        func = ctx["name"]
        print("exit  : " + func + "()")

    def uftrace_end():
        print("program is finished")

The above script can be executed in record time as follows:

    $ uftrace -S scripts/simple.py -F main tests/t-abc
    program begins...
    entry : main()
    entry : a()
    entry : b()
    entry : c()
    entry : getpid()
    exit  : getpid()
    exit  : c()
    exit  : b()
    exit  : a()
    exit  : main()
    program is finished
    # DURATION    TID     FUNCTION
                [10929] | main() {
                [10929] |   a() {
                [10929] |     b() {
                [10929] |       c() {
       4.293 us [10929] |         getpid();
      19.017 us [10929] |       } /* c */
      27.710 us [10929] |     } /* b */
      37.007 us [10929] |   } /* a */
      55.260 us [10929] | } /* main */

The 'ctx' variable is a dictionary type that contains the below information.

    /* context information passed to script */
    script_context = {
        int       tid;
        int       depth;
        long      timestamp;
        long      duration;    # exit only
        long      address;
        string    name;
        list      args;        # entry only (if available)
        value     retval;      # exit  only (if available)
    };

Each field in 'script_context' can be read inside the script.  Please see `uftrace-script`(1) for details about scripting.


SEE ALSO
========
`uftrace-record`(1), `uftrace-replay`(1), `uftrace-report`(1), `uftrace-script`(1)
